# Armour/cosmetic item instance values

The following non-vanilla armour/cosmetic item instance values are supported by xStarbound. All are quietly ignored without errors by clients that don't support them, and in all cases, values of the wrong type are quietly ignored, ensuring full backwards compatibility with stock Starbound, and it is safe to share items with any of these parameters on stock servers. Except as noted below, only the _viewer_ needs xClient to see the effects of the parameters below — the wearer can use any other client, which can come in handy for certain cases!

- **`humanoidConfig`:** _[xClient and OpenStarbound.]_ Optional JSON object (key-value map) that contains (mostly) cosmetic humanoid config overrides. For the most part, overrides specified in this object are identical to those specified in `$assets/humanoid.config` and in `"humanoidOverrides"` in your species or image path's `.species` file, but some bear special mention. Aside from a few exceptions mentioned below, a normal non-nulling JSON merge is performed to merge the overrides into the base humanoid configuration for the player or NPC's species or image path. _[Also supported by OpenStarbound.]_
  - **`"movementParameters"`:** If `"movementParameters"` overrides are present, these overrides, while having non-cosmetic in-game effects, are respected and applied by xStarbound and OpenStarbound, but are overridden by Lua scripts that modify or control movement parameters. Movement parameter overrides also show up in `mcontroller.parameters` (added to actor movement controller bindings on both xStarbound and OpenStarbound). Like other `"humanoidConfig"` overrides, overridden movement parameters are only applied if the armour item is not visually hidden.
  - **`"identity"`:** _[xClient only, but renders on all clients if the wearer is on xClient using `"broadcast"`.]_ Optional humanoid identity overrides. All five exceptions to the JSON merge rule exist here: The `"bodyDirectives"`, `"emoteDirectives"`, `"hairDirectives"`, `"facialHairDirectives"` and `"facialMaskDirectives"` keys (or «slots»). Any directive «slot» whose string contains any `<base>` tags undergoes special cumulative tag merging as described under `<base>`'s entry in _Cosmetic replacement tags_ below. There is one new optional `"identity"` key — `"broadcast"`. If this is set to `true` after all merges, the identity overrides are «broadcast» in a way that makes them visible to _all_ clients, including stock clients; otherwise, only xClient clients and xServer servers can see the overrides. Overrides affect the result of `world.entityPortrait` on clients and servers that are allowed to see them, and are always visible in team bar portraits due to how they're networked. Any `"gender"` overrides also affect which gender's armour sprites are used on clients that are allowed to see them.

    _Tip:_ If using xStarbound's `"nudehuman"` and `"undyhuman"` image paths, consider leaving `"broadcast"` off to avoid having an invisible body (and logging errors) on non-xClient clients (and consider avoiding team invites to avoid harmless, but annoying logged errors from your networked portrait).

    _Note:_ If `"broadcast"` is `true` after merges, the `"name"` identity parameter can be used to visually override (or hide) your nametag for all clients. If disabled (unspecified or any other value), `"name"` does nothing.

    _Note:_ Broadcast identity overrides are always visible to all clients as long as the item is visible on _your_ xClient client (or visible to an xServer server mastering an NPC), no matter whether it is a visible overlay, underlay, overlay on an underlay, or a visible item in an extended cosmetic slot, no matter whether the other clients can see the item itself (outside of the overrides).

    _Note:_ As of xStarbound v4.3.1+, NPCs mastered by an xStarbound client or server can broadcast humanoid overrides the same way that players on xClient can.

  _Note:_ On xStarbound v4.5+, any explicitly `null` object keys in overrides will reset earlier changes made to that key (as a nulling merge) before the final merge into the base humanoid config (which is a non-nulling merge). This can be useful for undoing a particular global override in `"humanoidConfig"` in, say, a `"floranHumanoidConfig"` override. On the off chance that an OpenStarbound cosmetic item contains a null object key-value pair anywhere in its `"humanoidConfig"` or sub-objects, its override behaviour on xStarbound might deviate from its behaviour on OpenStarbound.

- **`"<gender>HumanoidConfig"`, `"<species>HumanoidConfig"`:** [xClient v3.4.1+ only.] Optional JSON object. Same as `"humanoidConfig"` above, but only applies if the player's base species or gender (before all humanoid identity overrides) matches the one specified in the name of the key. For each item, any generic `"humanoidConfig"` is visited first if it exists, then the matching `"maleHumanoidConfig"` or `"femaleHumanoidConfig"` if it exists, then any matching `"<species>HumanoidConfig"` if it exists (e.g., a Floran will match `"floranHumanoidConfig"`).
- **`"flipDirectives"`:** Optional string that contains directives to be applied when the player or NPC is facing left. If the string begins with a `+`, the `+` is expanded into whatever is in the `"directives"`. These directives are only visible on xStarbound and OpenStarbound.
- **`"xSBdirectives"`:** _[If the wearer is using xClient v4.1.2+, renders on all clients. Otherwise only renders on xClient v4.2+ clients. `<speciesDirectives>` and `<genderDirectives>` substitution requires the wearer to use xClient v4.3.1+.]_ Optional directive string. Like `"directives"`, but supports substitution tags; see _Cosmetic substitution tags_ below. If this value contains a string, the resulting post-substitution directives will be networked (and rendered) in place of the standard `"directives"` (unless the player is facing left and there are `"xSBflipDirectives"`), allowing _all_ clients (including stock clients!) to see the item's appearance when you're wearing it.
- **`"xSBflipDirectives"`:** _[If the wearer is using xClient v4.1.2+, renders on all clients. Otherwise only renders on xClient v4.2+ clients. `<speciesDirectives>` and `<genderDirectives>` substitution requires the wearer to use xClient v4.3.1+.]_ Optional directive string. Like `"flipDirectives"`, but supports substitution tags; see _Cosmetic substitution tags_ below. If this value contains a string, the resulting post-substitution directives will be networked (and rendered) in place of the standard `"directives"` when the player is facing to the left, allowing _all_ clients (including stock clients!) to see the item's flipped appearance when you're wearing it.
- **`"maleDirectives"`, `"femaleDirectives"`, `"maleFlipDirectives"`, `"femaleFlipDirectives"`:** [If used in xSB directive substitutions and the wearer is using xClient v4.3.1+, renders on all clients.] Optional directive strings. Used for gender-specific xSB directive substitution (see below), where the directives are applied only if the wearer's gender matches the name of this parameter. The `"directivesUseOverrides"` parameter (and `"broadcast"` on overrides) control whether identity overrides are used for matches.
- **`"<species>Directives"`, `"<species>FlipDirectives"`:** [If used in xSB directive substitutions and the wearer is using xClient v4.3.1+, renders on all clients.] Optional directive strings. This is a special set of generic parameter names; in the actual parameter names, replace `<species>` with the species or image path the substitution directives are intended for; e.g., `"humanDirectives"`, `"floranFlipDirectives"`, etc. Used for species-specific xSB directive substitution (see below), where the directives are applied only if the wearer's image path (if present) or species matches the name of this parameter. The `"directivesUseOverrides"` parameter (and `"broadcast"` on overrides) control whether identity overrides are used for matches.
- **`"directivesUseOverrides"`:** [If the wearer is using xClient v4.3.1+, renders on all clients.] Optional string. Whether any directive tags present on the item's xSB directives should have any visible humanoid identity overrides from cosmetics applied to their return values as well as for determining which species / image path or gender to use when handling species/gender-specific tags. If `true`, the humanoid identity after overrides is used. If `false`, the base humanoid identity before overrides is used. If unspecified or any other value, the humanoid identity after overrides is used for matching the species and gender if those overrides are broadcast; otherwise, the base humanoid identity is used for matching.
- **`"stackedItems"`:** _[xClient only.]_ Optional array of versioned item descriptors that store overlays on this armour/cosmetic item.

  To stack overlays onto a base item on xClient, click the item you wish to use as an overlay to put it in in the swap slot, and then **<kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Right Click</kbd>** the base item you wish to overlay it onto (which must be of the same armour type, but valid items will show a small, red `+` indicator), which may already have overlays on it, and the item will disappear from the swap slot and be overlaid onto the base item. The base item needs to be in your armour/cosmetic slots or inventory to do this. The process may be further repeated with other armour/cosmetic items you want to use as overlays, as many times as you wish.

  To remove the topmost overlay from an overlaid base item, **<kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Right Click</kbd>** the stacked base item with an empty swap slot and the topmost overlay will be removed and appear in the swap slot. The base item again needs to be in your armour/cosmetic slots or inventory to do this. To remove further overlays, put the previously overlaid item aside somewhere in your inventory or a container and repeat the process.

  Stacks of up to 99 overlays are supported[^3], and overlaid items show a stack count that includes the base item in the count (e.g., an item with three overlays has a count of `4`). Stackable cosmetic items (with a `"maxStack"` instance value or config parameter other than `1`) cannot have overlays inserted onto them via the UI, because otherwise the overlay stack count wouldn't be visible.

  Overlaid base items do not show their stack count when in containers (or modded inventory extension panes), but don't worry — this is purely visual and it's perfectly safe to leave overlay-stacked items in containers on non-xServer servers or even hand them to players who are not using xClient.

  Overlaid items that do not match this (base) item's armour type (any of head, chest, legs or back) are quietly ignored by xClient (and can still be unstacked with a **<kbd>Shift</kbd> + <kbd>Right Click</kbd>** if, for some reason, you stuck an «incompatible» item in here), although errors in overlay item instantiation will convert the overlaid item into a Perfectly Generic Item (with all item data saved in it) upon any attempt to unstack it. Up to twelve visible xStarbound overlays are networked to OpenStarbound clients, with certain other caveats mentioned below.

  Overlays on items in xStarbound or OpenStarbound's extended cosmetic/wardrobe slots are visually ignored. That is, overlaid items must be in any vanilla cosmetic or armour slot for the overlays to be visible.

- **`"layered"`:** _[xClient only.]_ Optional boolean. If `true`, the following apply:
  - If this item is in an armour (not cosmetic) slot, this item and any overlays on it are visibly underlaid behind any item in the corresponding cosmetic slot or any items of the same type in the extended cosmetic slots, as long as the wearer isn't wearing any item in the stock cosmetic slots with this item's slot type «blacklisted» in its `"armorTypesToHide"` parameter.
  - If this item is in an extended cosmetic slot in xStarbound's wardrobe pane, the item (if it is a head item) applies any masks to head items below it, not just to hair, facial hair and facial masks (counter to OpenStarbound's behaviour), and for this item, `"hideInVanillaSlots"` (see below) behaves as it does on OpenStarbound (hence the parameter's name, for compatibility) and does _not_ visually hide the item.

  `"layered"` is assumed to be `true` for `"hideInVanillaSlots"` purposes, but the actual value (assumed `false` if not present) is used for head masking purposes, for items worn in the extended cosmetic slots by players on OpenStarbound clients.

  May be toggled on xClient by right-clicking the item in your armour/cosmetic slots or inventory. When enabled, the item has a red outer border.

- **`"armorTypesToHide"`:** _[xClient and OpenStarbound.]_ Optional array of armour type strings; valid strings are `"head"`, `"chest"`, `"legs"` and `"back"`. If this armour item is in a cosmetic slot (whether stock or OpenStarbound), is not an overlay, (for an xClient wearer) is _not_ hidden via `"hideInVanillaSlots"`, and (for an OpenStarbound-based wearer) is _not_ hidden via the slot's toggle setting saved in the player file (both of which are toggled via a middle-click on their respective clients), it visually hides any items in the armour (not cosmetic) slots of the specified types when worn.
- **`"hideInVanillaSlots"`:** _[xClient and OpenStarbound.]_ Optional boolean. If `true`, this armour item is visually hidden and all humanoid and identity overrides it has on it are disabled and, if it is not in an armour slot, the slot it occupies is treated as if it were empty for checking if items in armour slots should be shown. Hidden items in armour slots still apply their armour effects (including EPPs, etc.) normally; the effect is strictly visual, but hiddenness _does_ apply to the item's particle emitters.

  For non-overlay items in the stock armour and cosmetic slots, items hidden this way are «broadcast» by xClient as empty slots if the wearer is using xClient, so the item and its effects appear hidden on _all_ clients, even stock clients. This includes `"broadcast"` humanoid identity overrides on the item! Toggled by middle-clicking on the item on xClient. If the item is in an extended xStarbound wardrobe slot and `"layered"` (see above) is `true`, the item remains visible in that wardrobe slot; `"layered"` is intentionally assumed to be `true` in OpenStarbound cosmetic slots by xClient for visual parity with OpenStarbound.

  May be toggled on xClient by middle-clicking the item in your armour/cosmetic slots or inventory. If the wearer is using OpenStarbound, this setting only takes effect in the stock cosmetic slots (hence its name) and is only visible to OpenStarbound and xClient clients. A similar action may be accomplished on OpenStarbound with the same result by middle-clicking any armour or cosmetic _slot_ — the setting itself is saved to a special parameter in the player file outside of the inventory configuration.

  When an armour or cosmetic item is visually hidden, its inventory icon (but not border) is invisible and the slot's background is shown instead. If the item is in an extended cosmetic slot, its inventory icon's visibility is consistent with the item's actual visibility status; i.e., it is determined by whether `"layered"` is `true`.

- **`"bypassNude"`:** [xClient and OpenStarbound.] Optional boolean. If `true`, this item is visible even when the player is nude (i.e., has the `"nude"` status modifier). Doesn't do anything on overlays themselves, but if overlaid on an item with `"bypassEnabled"`, the overlay is also visible while nude (if it's not hidden, of course). Useful for underwear! Doesn't get networked to stock clients though.
- **`"hideBody"`:** _[xClient and OpenStarbound. xClient wearers network to all clients.]_ Optional boolean. Toggles whether the base humanoid body is invisible when this item is worn and not visually hidden. Works on xStarbound overlays and OpenStarbound cosmetic slots. On stock clients, this setting can only be changed in the item's asset file (i.e., its `.head`, `.chest`, `.legs` or `.back` file) and the _viewing_ client's setting is what's used. On OpenStarbound and xClient, this setting is supported as an instance value, and xClient v4.1.2+, the wearer's body is hidden for _all_ viewing clients if `"hideBody"` is enabled, regardless of its asset setting, but the setting can't be disabled on an item whose asset config has it enabled this way.
- **`"gender"`:** _[xClient only.]_ Optional string. If `"male"` or `"female"`, xClient displays that gender's sprites regardless of the player or NPC's gender; if unspecified or any other value, it does nothing and the vanilla behaviour is used. Note that without this setting, xClient always uses the armour sprites for the gender in the player or NPC's identity after overrides. Unfortunately visible only on other xClient v4.1.2+ clients, but hey, this is what directive sprites are for!

[^3] Technically, the supported overlay stack size is unlimited, but xClient's UI caps it at 99.

> **Image paths:** If the player or NPC has an `"imagePath"` specified in its base `"identity"`, any `"humanoidOverrides"` found in any associated `.species` file for the image path are prioritised over those for the player or NPC's base species. Any `"species"` or `"imagePath"` specified in an armour item's `"identity"` overrides are prioritised over base species / image path overrides, and humanoid overrides specified in the armour item's instance parameters override everything else. Note that `"movementParameters"` overrides, while having non-cosmetic in-game effects, are respected and applied by xStarbound, but are overridden by Lua scripts that modify or control movement parameters.

The following vanilla armour/cosmetic item instance values have had their behaviour changed by xStarbound. All changes are fully backwards-compatible with stock Starbound and OpenStarbound unless otherwise stated.

- **`"directives"`:** If this parameter's value begins with a `??` (two question marks), the item's armour directives are not applied to its inventory icon.
- **`"inventoryIcon"`:** Directives on image paths specified in this parameter are no longer stripped by xClient, but are stripped by vanilla clients. Backwards-compatible because nobody was putting directives in here anyway.
- **`"colorOptions"`:** Because of xClient's change to `"directives"`, directive string entries in this parameter are now required to begin with a `?` (question mark) on xClient, a minor compatibility break from stock and OpenStarbound. Hardly matters because nobody was putting directive strings in here anyway.

## Cosmetic substitution tags

xStarbound supports the following substitution tags in `"xSBdirectives"`, `"xSBflipDirectives"` and `"humanoidConfig"` → `"identity"` overrides. Their return values default to empty strings unless otherwise specified.

- **`<base>`:** For `"xSBdirectives"` and `"xSBflipDirectives"`, returns the item's base `"directives"` or `"flipDirectives"`, respectively; the returned `"flipDirectives"` do _not_ include any initial `+` or the right-facing directives it expands to (so use `+<base>` or `<right><base>` in your `"xSBflipDirectives"`).

  For identity directives, the current cumulative directives already in the identity «slot» being overridden by these directives (one of `"bodyDirectives"`, `"emoteDirectives"`, `"hairDirectives"`, `"facialHairDirectives"` and `"facialMaskDirectives"`); if `<base>` isn't present, the item will completely replace the cumulative (or base) directives in this «slot» when visited. Before any overrides are processed in a given «slot», `<base>` is equivalent to the player or NPC's base identity directives in this «slot». Processed before any other tag except `<right>`.

- **`<right>`:** _[Only available in `"xSBflipDirectives"`.]_ Returns the right-facing `"directives"` or, if present, `"xSBdirectives"`. Processed before any other tag, so that tags in the returned `"xSBdirectives"` get processed. Note that any `<base>` tags inside directives returned by `<right>` tags return the `"directives"`, not `"flipDirectives"`. Outside of directives returned by `<right>` tags, `<base>` returns `"flipDirectives"` (without any `+` or the directives it expands to). If a `+` prefix is present, `<right>` cannot be used. `+` is identical in effect to `<right>` at the beginning of the directive string.
- **`<speciesDirectives>`:** [Only available in `"xSBdirectives"` and `"xSBflipDirectives"`.] Returns any directives in the item's `"<species>Directives"` or `"<species>FlipDirectives"` parameter, where `<species>` is the wearer's species or image path; whether humanoid identity overrides are applied to this tag's value depends on the item's `"directivesUseOverrides"` setting. Processed after `<right>` and before any identity tag. Processed in the same pass as `<genderDirectives>`. If `"<species>FlipDirectives"` is present, it will be used instead of `"<species>Directives"` when the player or NPC is facing left. Returns an empty string if no matching species-specific directives parameters are found.
- **`<genderDirectives>`:** [Only available in `"xSBdirectives"` and `"xSBflipDirectives"`.] Returns any directives in the item's `"<gender>Directives"` or `"<gender>FlipDirectives"` parameter, where `<gender>` is the wearer's gender, either `male` or `female`; whether humanoid identity overrides are applied to this tag's value depends on the item's `"directivesUseOverrides"` setting. Processed after `<right>` and before any identity tag. Processed in the same pass as `<speciesDirectives>`. If `"<gender>FlipDirectives"` is present, it will be used instead of `"<gender>Directives"` when the player or NPC is facing left. Returns an empty string if no matching gender-specific directives parameters are found.
- **`<species>`:** The player or NPC's species name. Defaults to `human` internally if unspecified in the base identity.
- **`<imagePath>`:** The player or NPC's image path, used for humanoid rendering if present. If no image path is present, defaults to the player or NPC's species, and if that isn't present, defaults to `human` internally.
- **`<gender>`:** The player or NPC's gender, either `male` or `female`. Defaults to `male` internally if unspecified in the base identity.
- **`<bodyDirectives>`:** The player or NPC's body directives. These apply to the body (including the head and arms), but not to hair, emotes, facial hair or facial masks.
- **`<emoteDirectives>`:** The player or NPC's emote directives. Defaults to the player or NPC's body directives internally if unspecified in the base identity.
- **`<hairGroup>`:** The player or NPC's hair group. Defaults to `hair` internally if unspecified in the base identity. _Vanilla:_ This is `hairmale` or `hairfemale` for Apex and `hair` for all other vanilla species and image paths.
- **`<hairType>`:** The player or NPC's hair type. Defaults to `male1` internally if unspecified in the base identity. _Vanilla:_ Begins with `male` or `fem` for Humans and Novakids, is always `male1` for Fenerox and Shadow, and is always `male0` for Penguins. For all other species and image paths, it's just a number.
- **`<hairDirectives>`:** The player or NPC's hair directives. These don't apply to facial hair. Although head armour/cosmetic masks apply to these directives, the return value does not include any mask directives from head armour/cosmetic items.
- **`<facialHairGroup>`:** The player or NPC's facial hair group. _Vanilla:_ Is `beardmale` or `beardfemale` for Apex, `fluff` for Avians, `brand` for Novakids, and an empty string for all other vanilla species and image paths.
- **`<facialHairType>`:** The player or NPC's facial hair type. _Vanilla:_ Is a number for those species that have facial hair.
- **`<facialHairDirectives>`:** The player or NPC's facial hair directives. These don't apply to regular hair. Although head armour/cosmetic masks apply to these directives, the return value does not include any mask directives from head armour/cosmetic items.
- **`<facialMaskGroup>`:** The player or NPC's facial mask group. _Vanilla:_ Is `beaks` for Avians and an empty string for all other vanilla species and image paths.
- **`<facialMaskType>`:** The player or NPC's facial mask group. _Vanilla:_ Is a number for Avians.
- **`<facialMaskDirectives>`:** The player or NPC's facial mask directives. Although head armour/cosmetic masks apply to these directives, the return value does not include any mask directives from head armour/cosmetic items.
- **`<personalityIdle>`:** The player or NPC's idle body personality. Defaults to `idle.1` internally.
- **`<personalityArmIdle>`:** The player or NPC's idle arm personality. Defaults to `idle.1` internally.
- **`<headOffsetX>` and `<headOffsetY>`:** The X and Y values for the player or NPC's idle head offset, respectively. Both default to `0.0` internally.
- **`<armOffsetX>` and `<armOffsetY>`:** The X and Y values for the player or NPC's idle arm offset, respectively. Both default to `0.0` internally.
- **`<color>`:** The player or NPC's favourite colour. Defaults to `ffffffff` (i.e., fully opaque white) internally. _Vanilla:_ The default favourite colour defined in the vanilla `$assets/player.config` is `3375edff` (a light blueish colour, `51, 117, 237, 255` in decimal).

## Notes

**Merge visitation order:** When merging humanoid overrides, xClient visits armour slots in the following order: **Head Cosmetic → Head Armour → Chest Cosmetic → Chest Armour → Legs Cosmetic → Legs Armour → Back Cosmetic → Back Armour**. Overrides present on visible xStarbound overlays (i.e., with `"hideInVanillaSlots"` disabled) are visited just after their base item in back-to-front order. Any humanoid overrides set via `player.setHumanoidOverrides` in scripts are "visited" _before_ any overrides on armour/cosmetic items. For each item or overlay, humanoid configs are visited in the following order: **Generic `"humanoidConfig"` → `"maleHumanoidConfig"` or `"femaleHumanoidConfig"` → `"<species>HumanoidConfig"`**.

**Layering order:** When rendering humanoids and armour underlays and overlays, the following rendering order applies, from back to front:

1. Back armour → back armour overlays (back to front) → back cosmetic → back cosmetic overlays (back to front).
2. xStarbound/OpenStarbound back cosmetics in the extended slots, in numerical slot order from lowest to highest (left to right, legs → chest → head → back order on xStarbound's wardrobe window, or left to right, bottom to top on OpenStarbound's inventory screen[^1]).
3. Back arm. `"bodyDirectives"` are applied, then arm frame override directives (split from the frame override itself) are applied. If the arm frame override directives begin with `??` (two question marks), the vanilla behaviour — arm frame override directives _before_ `"bodyDirectives"` — is restored.[^2]
4. Chest armour back sleeves → chest armour overlay back sleeves (back to front).
5. xStarbound/OpenStarbound chest cosmetic back sleeves for items in the first four extended slots, in numerical slot order from lowest to highest (left to right, legs row on xStarbound's wardrobe window, or left to right, bottom row on OpenStarbound's inventory screen[^1]).
6. Chest cosmetic back sleeves → chest cosmetic overlay back sleeves (back to front).
7. xStarbound/OpenStarbound chest cosmetic back sleeves for items in the remaining extended slots, in numerical slot order from lowest to highest (left to right, chest → head → back order on xStarbound's wardrobe window, or left to right, middle to top on OpenStarbound's inventory screen[^1]).
8. Head. `"bodyDirectives"` are applied.
9. Emotes. `"emoteDirectives"`, if they exist in the identity after all overrides are accounted for, are applied to the emotes; otherwise `"bodyDirectives"` are applied. _Not_ masked by armour/cosmetics, but you can apply an `?addmask` directive to the `"emoteDirectives"` after `<base>` in the armour item's humanoid identity overrides to work around this.
10. Hair (including mask directives from head armour/cosmetics, in back-to-front order, _after_ the identity directives).
11. Body. `"bodyDirectives"` are applied.
12. Legs armour.
13. Chest and legs cosmetics (not including their sleeves) in the first four xStarbound/OpenStarbound extended slots, in numerical slot order from lowest to highest (legs-hinted row, left to right, on xStarbound's wardrobe window, or bottom row, left to right on OpenStarbound's inventory screen[^1]).
14. Chest armour (not sleeves).
15. Chest and legs armour overlays (not including their sleeves) in staggered order (**LEGS → CHEST → LEGS → CHEST → LEGS → CHEST → ...**); visually hidden overlays (with `"hideInVanillaSlots"` enabled) count as empty slots for staggering.
16. Legs cosmetic → chest cosmetic (not sleeves).
17. Chest and legs cosmetic overlays (not including their sleeves) in staggered order (**LEGS → CHEST → LEGS → CHEST → LEGS → CHEST → ...**); visually hidden overlays (with `"hideInVanillaSlots"` enabled) count as empty slots for staggering.
18. Chest and legs cosmetics (not including their sleeves) in the remaining xStarbound/OpenStarbound extended slots, in numerical slot order from lowest to highest (left to right, chest → head → back order on xStarbound's wardrobe window, or left to right, middle to top on OpenStarbound's inventory screen[^1]).
19. Facial hair (including mask directives from head armour/cosmetics, in back-to-front order, _after_ the identity directives). `"facialHairDirectives"` are applied. In vanilla Starbound, this includes Apex facial hair / beards, Novakid brands and Avian fluff.
20. Facial masks (including mask directives from head armour/cosmetics, in back-to-front order, _after_ the identity directives). `"facialMaskdirectives"` are applied. In vanilla Starbound, Avian beaks are facial masks.
21. Head armour → head armour overlays (back to front) → head cosmetic → head cosmetic overlays (back to front). For each head item in the «stack», mask directives from all head items _above_ that item are applied to the head item in back-to-front order, _after_ the item's own directives. The topmost item obviously has no mask directives applied to it.
22. xStarbound/OpenStarbound head cosmetics in the extended slots, in numerical slot order from lowest to highest (left to right, bottom to top on OpenStarbound's inventory screen[^1]). Mask directives from these items are applied to the hair, facial hair and facial mask in back-to-front order after all other head items' mask directives, but are intentionally _not_ applied to _any_ head items (including OpenStarbound cosmetics) to emulate OpenStarbound's behaviour in this regard for exact appearance matches.
23. Front arm. `"bodyDirectives"` are applied, then arm frame override directives (split from the frame override itself) are applied. If the arm frame override directives begin with `??` (two question marks), the vanilla behaviour — arm frame override directives _before_ `"bodyDirectives"` — is restored.[^2]
24. Chest armour back sleeves → chest armour overlay front sleeves (back to front).
25. xStarbound/OpenStarbound chest cosmetic front sleeves for items in the first four extended slots, in numerical slot order from lowest to highest (left to right, legs row on xStarbound's wardrobe window, or left to right, bottom row on OpenStarbound's inventory screen[^1]).
26. Chest cosmetic back sleeves → chest cosmetic overlay front sleeves (back to front).
27. xStarbound/OpenStarbound chest cosmetic front sleeves for items in the remaining extended slots, in numerical slot order from lowest to highest (left to right, chest → head → back order on xStarbound's wardrobe window, or left to right, middle to top on OpenStarbound's inventory screen[^1]).

[^1]: Assuming no mods that alter the layout of the cosmetic slots. When in doubt, use the slot numbers in the tooltips. For xStarbound, the order for the extended slot type hints is legs → chest → head → back.

[^2]: This is an intentional deviation from vanilla behaviour on both OpenStarbound and xStarbound, to prevent certain items from rendering big ugly squares caused by their `?crop` directives used to visually shift the sprite (or whatever else) being applied _before_ bodyDirectives (which may include a custom body sprite which depends on there not being weird `?crop` directives before it to be rendered properly). The `??` override to disable this behaviour is ignored by OpenStarbound.

> _Note on staggering:_ When staggering chest and legs overlays, if the number of chest overlays in a given layer ordering «slot» above does not match the number of legs overlays in the same slot, the remainder from the larger set of overlays is rendered back to front after the first N overlays, where N is the smaller number. Some examples:
>
> - **LEGS → CHEST → LEGS → LEGS → LEGS:** One chest overlay and four legs overlays.
> - **LEGS → CHEST → LEGS → CHEST → CHEST → CHEST:** Two legs items and four chest overlays.
> - **CHEST → CHEST:** Zero legs overlays and two chest overlays.

**xStarbound's extended wardrobe slots and OpenStarbound's extended cosmetic slots:** xClient adds 16 extended wardrobe slots; the first 12 slots are networked to OpenStarbound. The extended slots are hinted as «head», «chest», «legs» and «back» slots in the interface, but any slot may take any armour or cosmetic item of any slot type. xStarbound's legs-hinted extended slots differ in layering behaviour from the other extended slots — chest and legs items in the legs-hinted slots are layered _below_ chest items in the vanilla slots, while chest and legs items in any of the other slots are layered _above_ chest items in vanilla slots. This is consistent with OpenStarbound's behaviour with regard to its bottom row of extended slots.

_OpenStarbound-to-xStarbound:_ xClient renders OpenStarbound cosmetics _exactly_ as they are rendered on OpenStarbound, aside from human underwear if `"removeHumanUndies"` is disabled (or unspecified) in `xclient.config`. That is, barring some xStarbound-only parameters — humanoid `"identity"` overrides, in the instance parameters of items in _all_ OpenStarbound armour slots, and overlays and underlay statuses on items in the stock armour/cosmetic slots, _are_ rendered on xClient clients, including tag substitutions (but not the `"broadcast"` parameter, for obvious reasons). This can be used to «forcibly» remove the underwear on your OpenStarbound human character with a special armour-slot item that has the parameters `"layered": true` and `"humanoidConfig": { "identity": { "imagePath": "nudehuman" } }`.

_xClient-to-OpenStarbound:_ Since v4.5, xClient networks its first twelve extended wardrobe slot items (all except the slots with «back» hints) to OpenStarbound clients instead of networking xStarbound overlays in the vanilla cosmetic slots.

**Visual hiddenness:** The rules for this are relatively complex and depending on both the wearing and viewing clients.

_xClient viewers:_ For xClient clients viewing players mastered by any client (xClient, retail or otherwise) or NPCs mastered by any client or server, a «visually hidden» item is one for which at least _one_ of the following criteria apply:

- This item is in an armour (not cosmetic) slot, has layer visibility _disabled_ (i.e., `"layered"` is `false` or not present, and the underlay border isn't present), and the player/NPC is wearing an item in the corresponding cosmetic slot.
- This item is in an extended cosmetic slot, `"hideInVanillaSlots"` is `true` and `"layered"` is not `true` (e.g., `false` or unspecified).
- This item is in an armour (not cosmetic) slot, and the player/NPC is wearing another visible item in a cosmetic slot (retail or extended) whose `"armorTypesToHide"` value includes the armour type (head, chest, legs or back) of this item.
- This item has `"hideInVanillaSlots"` enabled and _either_ the wearer is using an xStarbound client _or_ the item is not in an extended (OpenStarbound) cosmetic slot.
- The player or NPC is nude (i.e., has the `"nude"` status modifier) and the item is a non-overlay that does not have `"bypassNude"` enabled.
- This item is acting as an xStarbound overlay on any other armour/cosmetic item to which at least _one_ of the other four criteria apply.
- This item is worn by a player, the wearer is using an OpenStarbound-based client and this item is in any slot marked as hidden on the wearer's client.
- _xClient only:_ This item is worn by an NPC in an extended cosmetic slot.

Additionally, the following visibility rule applies for xClient clients viewing NPCs mastered by any client or server:

- Extended-cosmetic-slot items are not visible on NPCs, nor do extended-cosmetic-slot items hide any armour-slot items via a matching base armour type or `"armorTypesToHide"`.

_OpenStarbound-based viewers:_ For OpenStarbound-based clients viewing players mastered by any client, the criteria for «visually hidden» include the rules for xClient viewers (_except_ the xClient-only rules), plus the following:

- This item is in an armour (not cosmetic) slot and an item that is _not_ hidden with `"hideInVanillaSlots"` (if the wearing client is xClient) or in a hidden slot (if the wearing client is OpenStarbound-based) is also worn in the corresponding cosmetic slot (e.g., a head cosmetic item hides a head armour item). This applies _regardless_ of `"layered"` status on armour-slot items.
- This item is in an armour (not cosmetic) slot and an item of the same armour type (head, chest, legs or back) that is _not_ hidden with `"hideInVanillaSlots"` and `"layered"` (if the wearing client is xClient) or in a hidden slot (if the wearing client is OpenStarbound-based) is worn in any of the first twelve extended cosmetic slots. This applies _regardless_ of `"layered"` status on armour-slot items.
- This item is in the last four extended xStarbound cosmetic slots (i.e., the four «Cosmetic Back» slots).
- This item is an overlay on an item in any extended xStarbound cosmetic slot.

Additionally, the following visibility rule applies for OpenStarbound-based clients viewing players mastered by any client:

- If the wearing/master client is xClient, any armour-slot item hidden by the `"armorTypesToHide"` setting or base armour type (heads, chest, legs or back) of any item in the last four xStarbound-only extended cosmetic slots (the extra back slots in xClient's wardrobe pane) is always visible unless hidden by `"hideInVanillaSlots"`, by OpenStarbound slot hiddenness, or by a visible item (i.e., an item with `"hideInVanillaSlots"` unset or set to `false`) in the corresponding retail armour slot.

Furthermore, the following visibility rule applies for OpenStarbound-based clients viewing NPCs:

- _OpenStarbound-based only:_ Extended-cosmetic-slot items (and the effects of those items' `"armorTypeToHide"` settings or their implicit hiding of corresponding armour-slot items) are visible on NPCs mastered by an OpenStarbound-based server or, _only_ if the server is OpenStarbound-based and _both_ viewing and master clients are connected in OpenStarbound mode (_not_ using **FORCE LEGACY**), by an OpenStarbound-based client. Only the first twelve cosmetic slots are visible on NPCs this way, as OpenStarbound supports only twelve extended cosmetic slots.

_Retail viewers:_ For retail clients viewing players mastered by any client, the criteria for «visually hidden» include the rules for xClient and OpenStarbound-based viewers (_except_ xClient-only or OpenStarbound-based-only rules), plus the following:

- This item is in any extended cosmetic slot.

Additionally, the following visibility rules apply for retail clients viewing players mastered by any client:

- Any armour slot item hidden by any cosmetic item's `"armorTypesToHide"` setting is always visible unless hidden by `"hideInVanillaSlots"` (for xClient wearers only!), by OpenStarbound slot hiddenness, or by a visible item (i.e., an item with `"hideInVanillaSlots"` unset or set to `false`) in the corresponding retail cosmetic slot.
- Any armour slot item hidden by any extended-cosmetic-slot item's base armour type (e.g., an extended-slot head item hiding any head armour slot item) is always visible unless hidden by `"hideInVanillaSlots"` (for xClient wearers only!), by OpenStarbound slot hiddenness or by a visible item (i.e., an item with `"hideInVanillaSlots"` unset or set to `false`) in the corresponding retail cosmetic slot.
- `"hideInVanillaSlots": true` in the parameters of any item in a retail cosmetic or armour slot does _not_ visually hide the item unless the wearer is using xClient.

_Dummy cosmetic slots:_ xClient assumes that the last four xStarbound extended cosmetic slots (the four extended «back» slots in the wardrobe interface) are empty when viewing characters mastered by OpenStarbound and OpenStarbound-fork clients. xClient, OpenStarbound and OpenStarbound forks assume that all extended cosmetic slots are empty when viewing player characters mastered by retail clients.

_Broadcast identity overrides:_ Humanoid identity overrides with `"broadcast"` enabled _don't_ abide by any additional rules imposed by non-xClient viewing clients if the _wearer_ is a player character mastered by an xClient client. If the item and its overrides are visible on xClient, the overrides are visible to everyone else, even retail clients! Similarly, if an item with broadcast identity overrides is _hidden_ for any reason on xClient, even if the item itself is visible on a non-xClient client, the overrides are hidden for everyone else.
